Address01 (#1284)
zonemaster/zonemaster: docs/public/specifications/tests/Address-TP/address01.md

A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR                | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address part of range intended for local use on network or service provider level "{ns_list}". 

The value in the Level column is the default severity level of the message. The
severity level can be changed in the [Zonemaster-Engine profile]. Also see the
[Severity Level Definitions] document.

The argument names in the Arguments column lists the arguments used in the
message. The argument names are defined in the [Argument list].

## Test procedure 

1. Create the empty set: Name server name and IP address ("Name Server IP").

2. Obtain the glue address records of each name server for the domain from the
   parent using the method [Get-Del-NS-Names-and-IPs] and add them to the 
   *Name Server IP* set. 

3. Obtain the IP addresses of each name server for the domain using the method 
   [Get-Zone-NS-Names-and-IPs] and add any non-duplicate results to 
   *Name Server IP* set. 

4. Create the following empty sets:
   1. Name server name and IP address ("Documentation Address").
   2. Name server name and IP address ("Local Use Address").

>    3. Name server name and IP address ("Not Globally Reachable").

Reviewer: Maybe create all the empty sets under 1?

5. For each name server in *Name Server IP* do:
   1. Match the IP address against the IP ranges specified in 
      [Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses]
      1. If if falls within any of the address ranges reserved for 
        *Documentation*, add the name server name and IP address to the
        *Documentation Address* set,
      2. Else, if it falls within an address range belonging to any of the 
         following categories:  
         - *Private-Use (IPv4)*
         - *Loopback (IPv4)*
         - *Loopback Address (IPv6)*
         - *Link Local (IPv4)*
         - *Link-Local Unicast* (IPv6)
         - *Unique-Local* (IPv6)
         - *Shared Address Space* (IPv6)
         add the name server name and IP address to the *Local Use Adddress* 
         set. 

>       3. Else, if the IP falls within a range that is not registered as 

Reviewer: To make even clearer and easier to understand maybe change "within a range" to "within any other range".

         *Globally Reachable*, add the name server name and IP address to 
         the *Not Globally Reachable* set.
   2. Go to the next server.
6. If the sets *Documentation Address*, *Local Use Adddress* and 
   *Not Globally Reachable* are all empty, then output 

>    *[A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]*

Reviewer: If the *Name Server IP* set is empty (which is normally is not when we come to this test case, but if this is the only test case tested) then the `A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE` tag would be set, which would be bad.

I suggest a bullet, before 6, maybe before current 5, that says

```
If the *Name Server IP* set is empty, exit the test case.
```

Optionally add a tag for the empty *Name Server IP* set case.

7. Else, if the union of the *Documentation Address*, *Local Use Address* and 
   *Not Globally Reachable* sets is equal to the *Name Server IP* set,
   then output *[A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR]* 
8. Else do:
   1. If the *Documentation Address* set is non-empty, then output 
      *[A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR]* with a list of name server names and IP addresses
      from the set.
   2. If the *Local Use Address* set is non-empty, then output 
      *[A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR]* with a list of name server names and IP addresses
      from the set.
   3. If the *Not Globally Reachable* set is non-empty, then output 
      *[A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]* with a list of name server names and 
      IP addresses from the set.

  
## Outcome(s)

The outcome of this Test Case is "fail" if there is at least one message
with the severity level *[CRITICAL]*.

The outcome of this Test Case is "warning" if there is at least one message
with the severity level *[ERROR]*, but no message with severity level
*[CRITICAL]*.

In other cases, no message or only messages with severity level

> *[INFO]*  the outcome of this Test Case is "pass".

Reviewer: The language in [Basic01] says
```
The outcome of this Test Case is "fail" if there is at least one message with the severity
level ERROR or CRITICAL.

The outcome of this Test Case is "warning" if there is at least one message with the 
severity level WARNING, but no message with severity level ERROR or CRITICAL.

In other cases, no message or only messages with severity level INFO or NOTICE, 
the outcome of this Test Case is "pass".
```
[Basic01]: https://github.com/zonemaster/zonemaster/blob/master/docs/public/specifications/tests/Basic-TP/basic01.md#outcomes

## Intercase dependencies

None.

 
[Special purpose IPv4 addresses]:   https://www.iana.org/assignments/iana-ipv4-special-registry/iana-ipv4-special-registry.xml 
[Special purpose IPv6 addresses]:   https://www.iana.org/assignments/iana-ipv6-special-registry/iana-ipv6-special-registry.xml
[Severity Level Definitions]:       ../SeverityLevelDefinitions.md
[Zonemaster-Engine profile]:        ../../../configuration/profiles.md
[Argument list]:                    ../ArgumentsForTestCaseMessages.md
[Get-Del-NS-Names-and-IPs]:         ../MethodsV2.md#method-get-delegation-ns-names-and-ip-addresses
[Get-Zone-NS-Names-and-IPs]:        ../MethodsV2.md#method-get-zone-ns-names-and-ip-addresses
[A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]:      #summary 
[A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR]:   #summary 
[A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]:  #summary 
[A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR]:           #summary 
[A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR]:               #summary 
[INFO]:                             ../SeverityLevelDefinitions.md#info
[WARNING]:                          ../SeverityLevelDefinitions.md#warning
[ERROR]:                            ../SeverityLevelDefinitions.md#error

> [CRITICAL]:                         ../SeverityLevelDefinitions.md#critical

Reviewer: Please sort this list.

# ADDRESS01: Name server address must be globally reachable

## Test case identifier
**ADDRESS01**

## Table of contents

* [Objective](#Objective)
* [Scope](#Scope)
* [Inputs](#Inputs)
* [Summary](#Summary)
* [Test procedure](#Test-procedure)
* [Outcome(s)](#Outcomes)
* [Intercase dependencies](#Intercase-dependencies)

## Objective

In order for the domain and its resources to be accessible, authoritative
name servers must have addresses in the reachable public addressing space.

IANA is responsible for global coordination of the IP addressing system.
Aside its address allocation activities, it maintains reserved address ranges
for special uses. These ranges can be categorized into two types:
[Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses].

This test checks the name server IP addresses, both those derived from delegation and those
derived from the name servers listed in the zone (NS records). Each address is compared against
the IANA databases. If an address is not globally reachable, a message is outputted.

## Scope

This test case does not do any actual connectivity test, which is done by other test cases.

## Inputs

> * "Child Zone" -- the domain name to be tested.

Author: Fixed

* [Special purpose IPv4 addresses]
* [Special purpose IPv6 addresses]

## Summary

| Message Tag                     | Level    | Arguments | Message ID for message tag                                                           |
|:--------------------------------|:---------|:----------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address not listed as globally reachable: "{ns_list}".                            |
| A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR          | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address intended for documentation purposes: "{ns_list}".                         |
| A01_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR     | INFO     | ns_list   | Globally reachable IP address: "{ns_list}".                                          |
| A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR              | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address intended for local use on network or service provider level: "{ns_list}". |
| A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR  | ERROR    |           | None of the name servers IP addresses are listed as globally reachable.              |

> | A01_NO_NAME_SERVERS_FOUND       | CRITICAL |           | No name servers found.                                                               |

Reviewer 2: @matsduf @tolvmannen Now I wonder why we do not use `ns_ip_list` for these message tags. The test case and message IDs specifically care about IP addresses only. Wouldn't it then be best to show only that?

```suggestion
| Message Tag                     | Level    | Arguments | Message ID for message tag                                                                     |
|:--------------------------------|:---------|:----------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE | ERROR    | ns_ip_list   | IP address(es) not listed as globally reachable: "{ns_ip_list}".                            |
| A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR          | ERROR    | ns_ip_list   | IP address(es) intended for documentation purposes: "{ns_ip_list}".                         |
| A01_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR     | INFO     | ns_ip_list   | Globally reachable IP address(es): "{ns_ip_list}".                                          |
| A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR              | ERROR    | ns_ip_list   | IP address(es) intended for local use on network or service provider level: "{ns_ip_list}". |
| A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR  | ERROR    |              | None of the name servers IP address(es) are listed as globally reachable.                   |
| A01_NO_NAME_SERVERS_FOUND       | CRITICAL |              | No name servers found.                                                                      |
```

Reviewer: Updated "address" to "address(es)".

The value in the Level column is the default severity level of the message. The
severity level can be changed in the [Zonemaster-Engine profile]. Also see the
[Severity Level Definitions] document.

The argument names in the Arguments column lists the arguments used in the
message. The argument names are defined in the [Argument list].

## Test procedure

1. Create the following empty sets:
   1. Name server name and IP address ("Name Server IP").
   2. Name server name and IP address ("Documentation Address").
   3. Name server name and IP address ("Local Use Address").

>    4. Name server name and IP address ("Not Globally Reachable").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   4. Name server name and IP address ("Not Globally Reachable").
   5. Name server name and IP address ("Globally Reachable").
```

> ## ADDRESS01: Name server address must be globally reachable

Reviewer: Change header level:
```
# ADDRESS01: Name server address must be globally reachable
```

See https://github.com/zonemaster/zonemaster/blob/master/docs/internal/templates/specifications/tests/Template01.md

* [Test procedure](#Test-procedure)
* [Outcome(s)](#Outcomes)
* [Intercase dependencies](#Intercase-dependencies)

## Objective

In order for the domain and its resources to be accessible, authoritative 
name servers must have addresses in the routable public addressing space.

IANA is responsible for global coordination of the IP addressing system.
Aside its address allocation activities, it maintains reserved address ranges
for special uses. These ranges can be categorized into two types: 
[Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses].

This test checks the name server IP addresses, both those derived from delegation and those 
derived from the name servers listed in the zone (NS records). Each address is compared against
the IANA databases. If an address is not globally routable, a message is outputted.

## Scope

This test case does not do any  actual connectivity test, which is done by other test cases.

## Inputs

* "Child Zone" -- the domain name to be tested.

## Summary

Message Tag                       | Level    | Arguments | Message ID for message tag
:-------------------------------- |:---------|:----------|:--------------------------

> A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE       | INFO     |           | All IP addresses of all name servers are listed as in the globally reachable address space.

Author: I agree.

A01_NO_NAME_SERVERS_FOUND         | CRITICAL |           | No name servers found.

> A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR    | CRITICAL |           | None of the name servers IP addresses are listed as globally reachable.

Reviewer: Maybe this should be lowered from CRITICAL to ERROR. In a local context testing might be possible. In the definition is says "A result at level CRITICAL means that the zone being tested has one or more problems that are so severe that it is not possible to even test it".

Reviewer: Yes, I suggest it to be ERROR instead of CRITICAL.

A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE   | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address not listed as globally reachable "{ns_list}".
A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR            | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address intended for documentation purposes "{ns_list}".
A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR                | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address intended for local use on network or service provider level "{ns_list}". 

The value in the Level column is the default severity level of the message. The
severity level can be changed in the [Zonemaster-Engine profile]. Also see the
[Severity Level Definitions] document.

The argument names in the Arguments column lists the arguments used in the
message. The argument names are defined in the [Argument list].

## Test procedure 

1. Create the following empty sets:
   1. Name server name and IP address ("Name Server IP").
   2. Name server name and IP address ("Documentation Address").
   3. Name server name and IP address ("Local Use Address").
   4. Name server name and IP address ("Not Globally Reachable").

> 2. Obtain the glue address records of each name server for the domain from the

Reviewer: for the domain --> for *Child Zone*

> 2. Obtain the glue address records of each name server for the *Child Zone* from the

Reviewer: I think "Obtain the address records" is more correct (removing) since the addresses are not necessarily glue records in the correct sence.

   parent using the method [Get-Del-NS-Names-and-IPs] and add them to the 
   *Name Server IP* set. 

3. Obtain the IP addresses of each name server for the domain using the method 
   [Get-Zone-NS-Names-and-IPs] and add any non-duplicate results to 

>    *Name Server IP* set. 

Author: Fair point.

> 4. If the *Name Server IP* set is empty, output *[A01_NO_NAME_SERVERS_FOUND]*

Reviewer: `[A01_NO_NAME_SERVERS_FOUND]` is missing in the link list.

   and exit the test.

5. For each name server in *Name Server IP* do:
   1. Match the IP address against the IP ranges specified in 
      [Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses]
      1. If if falls within any of the address ranges reserved for 
        *Documentation*, add the name server name and IP address to the
        *Documentation Address* set,
      2. Else, if it falls within an address range belonging to any of the 
         following categories:  
         - *Private-Use (IPv4)*
         - *Loopback (IPv4)*
         - *Loopback Address (IPv6)*
         - *Link Local (IPv4)*
         - *Link-Local Unicast* (IPv6)
         - *Unique-Local* (IPv6)
         - *Shared Address Space* (IPv6)
         add the name server name and IP address to the *Local Use Adddress* 

>          set. 

Author: Yeah, that flows better.

      3. Else, if the IP falls within any other range that is not registered as 
         *Globally Reachable*, add the name server name and IP address to 
         the *Not Globally Reachable* set.
   2. Go to the next server.
6. If the sets *Documentation Address*, *Local Use Adddress* and 
   *Not Globally Reachable* are all empty, then output 
   *[A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]*
7. Else, if the union of the *Documentation Address*, *Local Use Address* and 
   *Not Globally Reachable* sets is equal to the *Name Server IP* set,
   then output *[A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR]* 

> 8. Else do:

Reviewer: As I see the "else" bullet 8 will not be executed if 7 was executed. 8 will give useful details in any case there are non-global reachable name server addresses.

         - *Shared Address Space* (IPv6)
         add the name server name and IP address to the *Local Use Adddress* 
         set. 
      3. Else, if the IP falls within any other range that is not registered as 
         *Globally Reachable*, add the name server name and IP address to 
         the *Not Globally Reachable* set.
   2. Go to the next server.
6. If the sets *Documentation Address*, *Local Use Adddress* and 
   *Not Globally Reachable* are all empty, then output 
   *[A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]*
7. Else do:
   1. If the *Documentation Address* set is non-empty, then output 
      *[A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR]* with a list of name server names and IP addresses
      from the set.
   2. If the *Local Use Address* set is non-empty, then output 
      *[A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR]* with a list of name server names and IP addresses
      from the set.
   3. If the *Not Globally Reachable* set is non-empty, then output 
      *[A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]* with a list of name server names and 
      IP addresses from the set.
8. If the union of the *Documentation Address*, *Local Use Address* and 
   *Not Globally Reachable* sets is equal to the *Name Server IP* set,

>    then output *[A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR]* 

Reviewer: I think the specification is fine, but I think the following would be simpler. The "Else do" is really not needed.
```
7. If the *Documentation Address* set is non-empty, then output 
    *[A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR]* with a list of name server names and IP addresses
    from the set.
8. If the *Local Use Address* set is non-empty, then output 
    *[A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR]* with a list of name server names and IP addresses
    from the set.
9. If the *Not Globally Reachable* set is non-empty, then output 
    *[A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]* with a list of name server names and 
    IP addresses from the set.
10. If the union of the *Documentation Address*, *Local Use Address* and 
    *Not Globally Reachable* sets is equal to the *Name Server IP* set,
    then output *[A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR]* 
```

Author: makes sense.

# ADDRESS01: Name server address must be globally reachable

## Test case identifier
**ADDRESS01** 

## Table of contents

* [Objective](#Objective)
* [Scope](#Scope)
* [Inputs](#Inputs)
* [Summary](#Summary)
* [Test procedure](#Test-procedure)
* [Outcome(s)](#Outcomes)
* [Intercase dependencies](#Intercase-dependencies)

## Objective

In order for the domain and its resources to be accessible, authoritative 

> name servers must have addresses in the routable public addressing space.

Reviewer: Also see comment below.

```suggestion
name servers must have addresses in the reachable public addressing space.
```

IANA is responsible for global coordination of the IP addressing system.
Aside its address allocation activities, it maintains reserved address ranges
for special uses. These ranges can be categorized into two types: 
[Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses].

This test checks the name server IP addresses, both those derived from delegation and those 
derived from the name servers listed in the zone (NS records). Each address is compared against

> the IANA databases. If an address is not globally routable, a message is outputted.

Reviewer: To match the header of the test case. I think both "routable" or "reachable" can work, but for such a text it is better to use the same term.

```suggestion
the IANA databases. If an address is not globally reachable, a message is outputted.
```

A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR                | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address intended for local use on network or service provider level: "{ns_list}". 

The value in the Level column is the default severity level of the message. The
severity level can be changed in the [Zonemaster-Engine profile]. Also see the
[Severity Level Definitions] document.

The argument names in the Arguments column lists the arguments used in the
message. The argument names are defined in the [Argument list].

## Test procedure 

1. Create the following empty sets:
   1. Name server name and IP address ("Name Server IP").
   2. Name server name and IP address ("Documentation Address").
   3. Name server name and IP address ("Local Use Address").
   4. Name server name and IP address ("Not Globally Reachable").

2. Retrieve all name server names and IP addresses for *Child Zone* using 
   methods [Get-Del-NS-Names-and-IPs] and [Get-Zone-NS-Names-and-IPs].

2. Obtain the address records of each name server for the *Child Zone* from the
   parent using the method [Get-Del-NS-Names-and-IPs] and add them to the 
   *Name Server IP* set. 

> 3. Obtain the IP addresses of each name server for the domain using the method 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Obtain the IP addresses of each name server for *Child Zone* using the method 
```

   [Get-Zone-NS-Names-and-IPs] and add any non-duplicate results to 
   *Name Server IP* set. 

4. If the *Name Server IP* set is empty, output *[A01_NO_NAME_SERVERS_FOUND]*
   and exit the test.

5. For each name server in *Name Server IP* do:
   1. Match the IP address against the IP ranges specified in 
      [Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses]

>       1. If if falls within any of the address ranges reserved for 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      1. If the IP address falls within any of the address ranges reserved for 
```

        *Documentation*, add the name server name and IP address to the
        *Documentation Address* set,
      2. Else, if it falls within an address range belonging to any of the 
         following categories, add the name server name and IP address to the 
         *Local Use Adddress* set: 
         - *Private-Use (IPv4)*
         - *Loopback (IPv4)*
         - *Loopback Address (IPv6)*
         - *Link Local (IPv4)*
         - *Link-Local Unicast* (IPv6)
         - *Unique-Local* (IPv6)
         - *Shared Address Space* (IPv6)

>       3. Else, if the IP falls within any other range that is not registered as 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      3. Else, if it falls within any other range that is not registered as 
```

IANA is responsible for global coordination of the IP addressing system.
Aside its address allocation activities, it maintains reserved address ranges
for special uses. These ranges can be categorized into three types:

* [Special purpose IPv4

> addresses](https://www.iana.org/assignments/iana-ipv4-special-registry/iana-ipv4-special-registry.xml)

Reviewer: To make the text easier to read, keep the link reference here `[Special purpose IPv4 addresses]` and put the following at the end of the document:

```
[Special purpose IPv4 addresses]:   https://www.iana.org/assignments/iana-ipv4-special-registry/iana-ipv4-special-registry.xml
```

Applies of all cases with a URL.

* [Special purpose IPv6
addresses](https://www.iana.org/assignments/iana-ipv6-special-registry/iana-ipv6-special-registry.xml)
* [Multicast reserved
addresses](https://www.iana.org/assignments/multicast-addresses/multicast-addresses.xml).

### Scope

IP addresses from authoritative name servers are matched against IANAs list of public routable address ranges.

### Inputs

* The domain name to be tested.

### Summary

Message Tag          | Level    | Arguments     | Message ID for message tag
:--------------------|:---------|:--------------|:--------------------------
A01_IP_ADDRESSES_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE | INFO     |ns_list | IP addresses in "{ns_list}" listed as globally reachable.
A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_IP_ADDRESSES | CRITICAL     |ns_list | None of the IP addresses in "{ns_list}" listed as globally reachable.
A01_IP_ADDRESS_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE| ERROR     |ns | IP adress for "{ns}" not listed as globally reachable..

> A01_PRIVATE_IP_ADDRESS| ERROR     |ns | IP adress for "{ns}" part of RFC1918 private address ranges.

Reviewer: Please format with spaces to make more readable in text.

The value in the Level column is the default severity level of the message. The
severity level can be changed in the [Zonemaster-Engine profile]. Also see the

> [Severity Level Definitions] document.

Reviewer: Incomplete references (and in more places).

A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE       | INFO     |           | All IP addresses of all name servers are in the globally reachable address space.
A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR    | CRITICAL |           | None of the name servers IP addresses listed as globally reachable.
A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE   | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address for "{ns_list}" not listed as globally reachable.
A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR            | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address for "{ns_list}" part of address range for documentation purposes.
A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR                | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP address for "{ns_list}" part of address range intended for local use on network or service provider level..

The value in the Level column is the default severity level of the message. The
severity level can be changed in the [Zonemaster-Engine profile]. Also see the
[Severity Level Definitions] document.

The argument names in the Arguments column lists the arguments used in the
message. The argument names are defined in the [Argument list].

### Test procedure 

1. Obtain the IP addresses of each name server of the domain from the parent using

>    [Method4] and [Method5]. 

Reviewer: We should now switch to methods in [MethodsV2] whenever we do an update of an specification.

[MethodsV2]: https://github.com/zonemaster/zonemaster/blob/master/docs/public/specifications/tests/MethodsV2.md

IANA is responsible for global coordination of the IP addressing system.
Aside its address allocation activities, it maintains reserved address ranges

> for special uses. These ranges can be categorized into three types:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
for special uses. These ranges can be categorized into two types:
```

And even then, maybe the list below could be made inline. There is little point in having an itemized list with only two items if these items are short.

* [Special purpose IPv4 addresses]
* [Special purpose IPv6 addresses]

### Scope

IP addresses from authoritative name servers are matched against IANAs list of 
public routable address ranges.

### Inputs

* The domain name to be tested.

### Summary

Message Tag                       | Level    | Arguments | Message ID for message tag
:-------------------------------- |:---------|:----------|:--------------------------

> A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE       | INFO     |           | IP addresses listed as globally reachable.

Reviewer 3: How about: “All IP addresses of all name servers are in the globally reachable address space.”?

> A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE       | INFO     |           | IP addresses listed as globally reachable.

Reviewer: Longer.

A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR    | CRITICAL |           | None of the IP addresses listed as globally reachable.

> A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE   | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP adress for "{ns}" not listed as globally reachable.

Reviewer 3: “Address” is spelled with two d’s.

A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR            | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP adress for "{ns}" part of address range for documentation purposes.

> A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR                | ERROR    | ns_list   | IP adress for "{ns}" part of address range intended for local use on network or service provider level..

Reviewer: The message ID should be updated with "{ns_list}". 

I also suggest that the message is reworded so that "ns_list" can be put last i the message ID. The list of name servers will break the reading of the textual message. For how "ns_list" is put at the end of message ID see e.g. [messages in specification of Zone11]. (Single name server in "ns" can be put in the middle of the message ID.)

[messages in specification of Zone11]: https://github.com/zonemaster/zonemaster/blob/master/docs/public/specifications/tests/Zone-TP/zone11.md#summary

The value in the Level column is the default severity level of the message. The
severity level can be changed in the [Zonemaster-Engine profile]. Also see the
[Severity Level Definitions] document.

The argument names in the Arguments column lists the arguments used in the
message. The argument names are defined in the [Argument list].

### Test procedure 

1. Obtain the IP addresses of each name server of the domain from the parent using
   [Method4] and [Method5]. 

2. Create the following empty sets:

>    1. Name server name and IP address ("Documentetion Address").

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Name server name and IP address ("Documentation Address").
```

   2. Name server name and IP address ("Local Use Address").

>    3. Name server name and IP address ("Not Gobally Reachable").

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   3. Name server name and IP address ("Not Globally Reachable").
```

3. For each name server in *Name Server IP* do:

>    1. Match the IP the address against the IP ranges specified in 
>       [Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Match the IP address against the IP ranges specified in 
      [Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses].
```

      1. If if falls within any of the address ranges reserved for 
        *Documentation*, add the name server name and IP address to the

>         *Documentetion Address* set,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        *Documentation Address* set,
```

      2. Else, if it falls within an address range belonging to any of the 
         following categories:  
         - *Private-Use (IPv4)*
         - *Loopback (IPv4)*
         - *Loopback Address (IPv6)*
         - *Link Local (IPv4)*
         - *Link-Local Unicast* (IPv6)
         - *Unique-Local* (IPv6)
         - *Shared Address Space* (IPv6)
         add the name server name and IP address to the *Local Use Adddress* 
         set. 
      3. Else, if the IP falls within a range that is not registered as 
         *Globally Reachable*, add the name server name and IP address to 

>          the *Not Gobally Reachable* set.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
         the *Not Globally Reachable* set.
```

   2. Go to the next server.

> 4. If the sets *Documentetion Address*, *Local Use Adddress* and 
>    *Not Gobally Reachable* are all empty, then output 
>    *[A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. If the sets *Documentation Address*, *Local Use Address* and 
   *Not Globally Reachable* are all empty, then output 
   *[A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]*
```

> 5. Else, if the sets *Documentetion Address*, *Local Use Adddress* and 
>    *Not Gobally Reachable* when combined contains all the name servers in
>    *Name Server IP*, then output *[A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR]* 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Else, if the union of the *Documentation Address*, *Local Use Address* and 
   *Not Globally Reachable* sets is equal to the *Name Server IP* set,
   then output *[A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR]* 
```

6. Else do:

>    1. If the *Documentetion Address* set is non-empty, then output 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. If the *Documentation Address* set is non-empty, then output 
```

      *[A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR]* with a list of name server names and IP addresses
      from the set.
   2. If the *Local Use Address* set is non-empty, then output 

>       *[A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR]]* with a list of name server names and IP addresses

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      *[A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR]* with a list of name server names and IP addresses
```

      from the set.

>    3. If the *Not Gobally Reachable* set is non-empty, then output 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   3. If the *Not Globally Reachable* set is non-empty, then output 
```

      *[A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]* with a list of name server names and 
      IP addresses from the set.

  
### Outcome(s)

The outcome of this Test Case is "fail" if there is at least one message
with the severity level *[CRITICAL]*.

The outcome of this Test Case is "warning" if there is at least one message
with the severity level *[ERROR]*, but no message with severity level
*[CRITICAL]*.

In other cases, no message or only messages with severity level
*[INFO]*  the outcome of this Test Case is "pass".

### Special procedural requirements

The registries [Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and 

> [Special purpose IPv6 addresses] and have to be fetched prior to testing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Special purpose IPv6 addresses] have to be fetched prior to testing.
```

IANA is responsible for global coordination of the IP addressing system.
Aside its address allocation activities, it maintains reserved address ranges
for special uses. These ranges can be categorized into three types:

* [Special purpose IPv4 addresses]
* [Special purpose IPv6 addresses]

### Scope

IP addresses from authoritative name servers are matched against IANAs list of public routable address ranges.

### Inputs

* The domain name to be tested.

### Summary

Message Tag                       | Level    | Arguments | Message ID for message tag
:-------------------------------- |:---------|:----------|:--------------------------
A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE       | INFO     | ns_list   | IP addresses in "{ns_list}" listed as globally reachable.

> A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR    | CRITICAL | ns_list   | None of the IP addresses in "{ns_list}" listed as globally reachable.

Reviewer: If "ns_list" it can be a really long list and then it will be hard to read the text broken with the name servers in the middle. Suggestion:
```
IP addresses in for the name servers listed are globally reachable. Name servers: {ns_list}
```
Does the second message really need any list of name servers? All name servers will be listed with another tag too.

A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE   | ERROR    | ns        | IP adress for "{ns}" not listed as globally reachable.
A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR            | ERROR    | ns        | IP adress for "{ns}" part of address range for documentation purposes.
A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR                | ERROR    | ns        | IP adress for "{ns}" part of address range intended for local use on network or service provider level..

The value in the Level column is the default severity level of the message. The
severity level can be changed in the [Zonemaster-Engine profile]. Also see the
[Severity Level Definitions] document.

The argument names in the Arguments column lists the arguments used in the
message. The argument names are defined in the [Argument list].

### Test procedure 

1. Obtain the IP addresses of each name server of the domain from the parent using
   [Method4] and [Method5]. 

2. For each name server in *Name Server IP* do:
   1. Match the IP the address against the IP ranges specified in [Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses]

>       1. If if falls within any of the address ranges reserved for *Documentation*, then output *[A01_DOCUMENTATION_ADDR]* with name and IP address of the server.

Reviewer: Please limit the lines to 80 characters (applies to several lines).

      2. Else, if it falls within an address range belonging to any of the following categories:  
         - *Private-Use*
         - *Loopback*
         - *Loopback Address*
         - *Link Local*
         - *Link-Local Unicast*
         - *Unique-Local*

>          - *Shared Address Space*

Reviewer: Maybe `*Private-Use* (IPv4)`, `*Unique-Local* (IPv6` etc. In that way it will be easier to read.

>          then output *[A01_LOCAL_USE_ADD]* with name and IP address of the server.

Reviewer: "A01_LOCAL_USE_ADD" --> "A01_LOCAL_USE_ADDR"

>          then output *[A01_LOCAL_USE_ADD]* with name and IP address of the server.

Reviewer: As it is written the message will be outputted for each e.g. private address. It is better to collect the addresses into sets and then output the message for that set. See e.g. [Basic02] for that technique.

[Basic02]: https://github.com/zonemaster/zonemaster/blob/master/docs/public/specifications/tests/Basic-TP/basic02.md

      3. Else, if the IP falls within a range that is **not** registered as *Globally Reachable*, output *[A01_ADDR_NOT_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]* with name and IP address of the server.
   2. Go to the next server.

> 3. If **all** servers in *Name Server IP* are mentioned in at least one message with the severity level *[ERROR]*, then output *[A01_NO_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE_ADDR]* 

Reviewer: It is better to refer to the tags directly instead of the level.

> 4. If **none** of the servers are mentioned in a message with a higher severity level than *[INFO]*, then output *[A01_ADDR_GLOBALLY_REACHABLE]*

Reviewer: Is bolding `**...**` needed in the text?

 

### Outcome(s)

The outcome of this Test Case is "fail" if there is at least one message
with the severity level *[CRITICAL]*.

The outcome of this Test Case is "warning" if there is at least one message
with the severity level *[ERROR]*, but no message with severity level
*[CRITICAL]*.

In other cases, no message or only messages with severity level
*[INFO]*  the outcome of this Test Case is "pass".

### Special procedural requirements

> The registries [Special purpose IPv4 addresses] and [Special purpose IPv6 addresses] and has to be fetched prior to testing.

Reviewer: "has" --> "have"

### Special procedural requirements

> The registries listed in the [Objective](#Objective) section above must be fetched prior to testing.

Reviewer: I propose direct references instead.
